.nr X
.TH cb 1 "28 Apr 2020"
.SH NAME
cb \- compile and link one or more simple C programs and associated modules
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cb [--allclean]
.I program_name+
OR
.LP
.B cb [-n] [--directincludes|--allincludes|--makefile] [--debug] [clean|allclean|install|test]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Given the name of one or more main programs we'd like to build from their
corresponding source files, either specified on the command line or (more
typically) defined in the BUILD = list_of_programs line in your .cbuild file,
.B cb
analyses all the .c files in the current directory,
builds a series of make-style rules for compiling and linking the
appropriate pieces, and runs them - all without you having to write a Makefile.

In fact, if you run
.B cb
in a directory with no .cbuild file and with no target name on the command line,
.B cb
locates all .c files with main() inside and writes a .cbuild file
specifying that BUILD = executable_versions_of_all_those_source_files,
and builds them now.  This useful behaviour is inhibited if there's
a BUILD setting in a parental .cbuild file - this is arguably incorrect
and may be fixed later.

In most cases,
.B cb
is mainly driven by simple declarative definitions in a
.B .cbuild
file (either in the current directory, or an ancestral directory,
or a standard per-user directory, or a system directory).
Note that you don't normally need to put any make-style
rules in any
.B .cbuild
files, as they are automatically figured out.

.SH FLAGS
.TP 10
.B "-n"
Dryrun mode. Print commands that would run (just like Make's -n option,
this is an approximation based on faking timestamps, it's not always
perfect but works pretty well).

.TP 10
.B "--allclean"
.B cb
normally takes
.B allclean
as a target name, but this requires that
.B cb
knows what it's building (eg. by a BUILD = xxx target in the .cbuild file).
This flag version of allclean is useful for those rare occasions when
you want a complete rebuild of a specific main program - without editing
the .cbuild file - allowing you to say
.B cb --allclean MAINPROGRAMNAME
The same logical argument can probably be made for clean, install etc
but I am still thinking about them.

.TP 10
.B "--directincludes"
Show the
.B direct
#include dependencies that
.B cb
discovers, and then quit.
This can be useful to debug what
.B cb 
is doing.
A simple utility like "graphpairs" can
take this "edge list of pairs" output and
use GraphViz's "dot" tool to graph
this for you.

.TP 10
.B "--allincludes"
Show the
.B indirect
#include dependencies that
.B cb
discovers, and then quit.
This can be useful to debug what
.B cb 
is doing.
Again, a simple utility like "graphpairs" can
take this "edge list of pairs" output and
use GraphViz's "dot" tool to graph
this for you.

.TP 10
.B "--makefile"
Attempts to show a complete Makefile; and then quit.

.TP 10
.B "--debug"
Enter debugging mode, this prints lots of messages, some of them not very high quality.
These messages are intended only to help me debug
.B cb,
you probably shouldn't rely on them.


.SH MORE DETAILED DESCRIPTION

.LP
NEW for June 2022 (i.e. just too late for C Tools 2022 course, dammit) I've
given 
.B cb
nested include support, for the first time ever.
So now, even if you insist on putting includes of .h files INSIDE .h files,
this tool should now work properly - and hopefully without ever getting
stuck in a loop.

.LP
.B cb
operates by reading all .c and .h files in the current directory,
looking for #include "Y.h" lines,
either directly (where a .c file directly #includes a .h file) or indirectly
(where a .c file #includes A.h and A.h #includes B.h and B.h #includes... and
so on.  i.e. nested includes - .h files with guards including other .h files).

.LP
The critical assumption that
.B cb
makes is that if X.c includes Y.h and there is also a file called Y.c,
this is not a coincidence - X.h and X.c form a conventional two-part C module.
(In fact, in that scenario, Y.c should also #include Y.h,
in order to allow the C compiler to check that the implementation (Y.c) is compatible
with the definitions and declarations in the interface (Y.h).)
Hence if anyone includes Y.h, Y.o will need to be linked with the corresponding
main program.

.LP
.B cb
uses this dependency information that it infers from the #include structure
to build a series of compilation rules (one per .c source file), and a series
of linking rules (one per buildable program),
and then applying those rules in a very Make-like fashion,
stopping immediately if any fail (return a non-zero exit status).

.LP
.B cb
starts by searching for, reading and merging, definitions from all the following files:
.B /etc/cbuilddefs,
.B $HOME/include/cbuilddefs
.B $HOME/c-tools/lib
.B ../../.cbuild
.B ../.cbuild
and
.B .cbuild
or
.B .build
(in such a way that "ancestral" definitions are overridden by "child" definitions).

.SH FILES
.TP 20
.B .cbuild
(in the current directory) - per-project definitions incorporated into
the top of the Makefile.  Although
.B cb
can just about function without a
.B .cbuild
file (as long as you always name an executable to build on the
command line), I recommend always having, at least, a minimal
.B .cbuild
file, such as:
.nf
# cb definitions
CC      =       gcc
CFLAGS  =       -Wall
BUILD   =       program1 program2 program3...
.fi
where CC and CFLAGS should be obvious to any Make user, and
.B BUILD
lists which executables
.B cb
should build by default.  At some point in the future,
.B cb
may start warning if there is no
.B .cbuild
file in the current directory!

.SH ADVANCED FEATURES
.B cb
automatically has the ability to
.B clean
and
.B allclean
(clean and then build everything),
without you needing to specify what should be cleaned.
What does it clean?  Every rule's target, because that is generated
from other things (it's sources) so is trivially regeneratable.

.B cb
also has the ability to build (statically linked) libraries,
if you add definitions to your .cbuild such as:
.nf
# Library LIB will be built from LIBOBJS
LIB     =       libintlist.a
LIBOBJS =	intlist.o

# what to build
BUILD   =       testlist $(LIB)
.fi

then
.B cb,
after building the library object files (here
.B intlist.o
), will run that standard "build me a library" command:

.nf
ar rcs libintlist.a intlist.o
.fi

.B cb
also has the ability to run whatever test commands you like
(by invoking
.B cb test
) by adding definitions to your .cbuild file like:
.nf
# test commands for "cb test" to run
TEST1	=	echo hi
.fi

Here, the definition names must be TEST1, TEST2...; cb stops looking
as soon as one TESTi is missing.  Each TEST1 definition is a
Unix command to run.  "cb test" will, after normal compilation and linking
and library building, run these commands exactly as given.  You may wish
to invoke some test summarising script to give a nice report of how many
tests succeed and fail, but that's your business entirely.

.B cb
also has the ability to install whatever you like (by invoking
.B cb install
) by adding definitions to your .cbuild file like:
.nf
# installations to perform (each mode, file, directory)
INST1	=	644 $(LIB) $(LIBDIR)
INST2	=	644 intlist.h $(INCDIR)
.fi

Here, the definition names must be INST1, INST2...; cb stops looking
as soon as one INSTi is missing.  Each INST1 definition is basically
a Unix install command without the word "install".  That's added so
that "cb install" will, after normal compilation and linking and library
building, only run install commands.

.SH "Multi-Directory Builds"

.B cb
has some useful but simplistic support for handling multi-directory builds.
To support this, there are new definitions
.B SUBDIR,
.B SUBLIB,
.B SUBINC,
.B EXTRA_CFLAGS
and
.B EXTRA_LDLIBS.

Let's examine an example in detail to understand what
.B cb
can do, and how these new definitions interact.

Suppose our top level directory contains one or more C program files,
and zero or more accompanying C modules (pairs of .c and .h files),
along with zero or more unaccompanied .h files,
but that you also have a subdirectory (imaginatively called
.B lib
) that contains some additional (self-contained C code) that, when compiled,
will build a single deliverable
.B library
(which the programs in the top level directory will then need to link against).

Note that each directory (both the top-level and the lib subdirectory) need to
have it's own
.B build
file.  I did consider some form of single
.B build
file for multiple directories, but couldn't come up with a nice syntax without
unnecessary complexity.

First of, to tell
.B cb
in the top-level directory
that there's a subdirectory called
.B lib
that it should attempt to build
(before the targets in the top-level directory itself),
the top-level directory's
.B .cbuild
file should contain a definition like:
.nf
SUBDIR	=	lib
.fi

This, alone, will cause
.B cb
to automatically run
.B "cd lib; cb"
before doing it's own actions.
Note that you can have more than one subdirectory named in SUBDIR, as in:
.nf
SUBDIR	=	lib1 lib2 lib3
.fi
in which case
.B cb
will sequence through the named subdirectories,
entering and building everything in
.B lib1
first, then entering and building everything in
.B lib2
second, etc.
Only after building all the materials in all 3 library directories,
will
.B cb
decide which actions it needs to run in the top-level directory.

This
.I "run in subdirectories"
behaviour is likely to be especially useful for standard commands such as:
.B cb,
.B cb clean
and
.B cb allclean,
because they are all applicable at all levels.  Currently,
.B cb
has a static list of which command-line build targets to pass on into sub-directory builds,
and when to run
.B cb
with no arguments in subdirectories.

Turning to the
.B lib
subdirectory now,
let's assume that
.B lib
contains an
.I "list of integers"
module (i.e. a pair of files:
.B intlist.c
and
.B intlist.h
) and a unit test program to test the intlist module.
Let's also assume that we wish to build a library
.B libintlist.a
from
.B intlist.c.

To do say, the lib directory's
.B .cbuild
file should say:

.nf
# Library LIB will be built from LIBOBJS
LIB     =       libintlist.a
LIBOBJS =       intlist.o

# what to build
BUILD   =       testlist $(LIB)
.fi

(exactly as we discussed above when discussing
.B LIB
and
.B LIBOBJS).

So now, in the top-level directory, if we run:

.nf
cb
.fi

It will first enter
.B lib
and run
.B cb
there, building the library
.B libintlist.a
and the test program
.B testlist,
and will then return to the top-level directory, and run whichever actions it's own
dependency rules deem necessary.

What's our next step?
We said that the code in the top-level directory would need to be linked against
the libintlist.a library in the lib subdirectory.  To do that,
we need to alter the top-level directory's 
.B .cbuild
file to manipulate CFLAGS and LDLIBS to
cause the C compiler to search the lib directory both for include files and libraries,
and name the library that the lib directory contains.  We achieve this by adding:

.nf
EXTRA_CFLAGS	=	-Ilib
EXTRA_LDLIBS	=       -Llib -lintlist
.fi

to the top-level directory's
.B .cbuild
file.

.B EXTRA_CFLAGS
and
.B EXTRA_LDLIBS
add extra text to the standard CFLAGS and LDLIBS definitions.
This gives an effective CFLAGS of
.nf
-Wall -Ilib
.fi
and LDLIBS of
.nf
-Llib -lintlist
.fi

Note that all
.B SUB* and
.B EXTRA*
definitions only affect the directory they are in,
they are
.B "not inherited"
into subdirectories.  This means that when
.B cb
starts by entering the
.B lib
subdirectory and compiling the intlist.c and testlist.c source files,
it will do so with no SUBLIBs, and the minimal
.nf
CFLAGS	=	-Wall
LDLIBS	=
.fi
definitions.
Before I added EXTRA_CFLAGS and EXTRA_LDLIBS, the
top-level .cbuild file had to set:
.nf
CFLAGS	=	-Wall -Ilib
LDLIBS	=	-Llib -lintlist
.fi
and the lib subdirectory's .cbuild file had to reset them:
.nf
CFLAGS	=	-Wall
LDLIBS	=	
.fi

EXTRA_CLAGS and EXTRA_LDLIBS were added to remove this nastiness.


One wrinkle remains.  Although setting
.B SUBDIR
causes
.B cb
enters the subdirectory and re-invoke itself,
when it returns to the current directory and runs it's dependency
checks, it won't realise that things in the subdirectory have changed.
This means that, if the library
.B libintlist.a
is rebuilt (because intlist.c is recompiled) in the lib subdirectory,
.B cb
will fail to relink all programs in the top-level directory against the
new version of
.B libintlist.a.
Similarly, if
.B intlist.h
has changed in lib, it will fail to recompile C source files in the top-level directory
that include intlist.h.

To fix that, I added two more definitions, as well as setting SUBDIR
(in the top-level directory's
.B .cbuild
file), you can specify "sub library files" and "sub include files" that will
be used as additional dependencies to linking and compilation respectively.  Eg:

.nf
SUBLIB	=	lib/libintlist.a
SUBINC	=	lib/intlist.h
.fi

This automatically includes lib in compilations, cleans etc,
as before,
but also adds a link dependency to lib/libintlist.a into all program
link rules, and a compilation dependency to lib/intlist.h into all
compilations (whether or not they include intlist.h).

You may think of this as naming
.I "the deliverables from the lib subdirectory".

With this final tweak in place, running
.B cb
in the top-level directory
goes inside the
.B lib
subdirectory first and reinvokes
.B cb
(rebuilding, if necessary, the
.B libintlist.a
library), and then
back in the top-level directory,
.B cb
recompiles whatever C source files need recompilation because on
within-directory timestamp changes, and then
relinks all C programs if any of the within-directory object files
have changed, or
.I "if lib/libintlist.a has been rebuilt".

You can see the complete two-directory example this discussion was based on,
in the test4 example directory in the
.B cb
source directory.

In particular, observe how test4/.cbuild says:

.nf
# automatically include lib in compilations, cleans etc,
# and add a link dependency to lib/libintlist.a in there
# (ie. this is the deliverable from the lib subdirectory)
SUBDIR	=	lib/libintlist.a

# the following settings apply only to this directory
EXTRA_CFLAGS	=	-Ilib
EXTRA_LDLIBS	=       -Llib -lintlist
.fi

whereas test4/lib/.cbuild makes no mention of them.  In earlier
versions of cb, all settings were inherited and that caused
considerable problems when cb ran itself in the lib directory.


.SH "Extra Rules"

Occasionally, you may need to add extra Make-style rules into your
.B .cbuild
files.  Not for routine C compilation, linking or building libraries etc,
but when you are using other tools (such as
.B yacc, lex
or
my own
.B datadec
) which construct .c files (and/or .h files) automatically.

.B cb
has some useful but simplistic support for handling extra rules:

In your
.B .cbuild
file, you can add rules like:

.nf
RULE1 = parser.c!parser.y!yacc -vd parser.y
.fi

This causes
.B cb
to add a Make-style rule:

.nf
parser.c:	parser.y
	yacc -vd parser.y
.fi

into it's internal rules, which are then applied to construct software.
This will cause
.B cb
to run yacc to regenerate parser.c from parser.y if (as usual with Make)
parser.c does not exist, or if it exists but is older than parser.y.

RULEn declarations in your .cbuild file (like TESTn and INSTn
declarations) must be numbered numerically - RULE1, RULE2, RULE3... -
.B cb
will stop adding extra rules when it finds a missing RULEn.

.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR make (1)
.BR mfbuild (1)
.LP
